Our text today is very encouraging
as it reminds us,
through this example of Amos,
that Jehovah notices the potential
of each one of his servants.
In fact, one of the comments
from today’s text states:
“Even though we may
lack self-confidence,
“Jehovah can help us
go beyond our perceived limits
and reach goals that we
would not have imagined.”
See, Jehovah knows our potential.
But you note from that statement,
this is also a reminder
that we have to put forth effort
to reach our potential.
You see, if we’re not careful,
we can sabotage our own efforts
to reach the potential
that Jehovah sees in us.
How’s that possible?
Well, let’s look at three examples.
Number one:
We can limit potential
by not throwing ourselves
into what we are asked to do.
Now, we may remember
the account of Jehoash
the king of Israel
there in 2 Kings chapter 13,
when he visited
the prophet Elisha who was dying.
And you notice there
at 2 Kings 13:17
that Elisha
notes Jehoash’s potential.
You notice he says there
that: “You will
strike down Syria . . .
until you finish it off.”
See, he noted the potential
that he had to finish off Syria.
But then what happens?
Well, you remember that’s where
Elisha tells the king
to beat the arrows
on the ground three times or—
beat it on the ground,
and he only does it three times.
Notice what happens in verse 19:
“At that the man of the true God
“grew indignant at him and said:
“‘You should have struck the ground
five or six times!
“‘Then you
would have struck down Syria
“‘until you finished it off,
“‘but now
you will strike down Syria
only three times.’”
What happened?
Well, you see, by not throwing himself
into what he was asked to do
—showing zeal for his assignment—
he would only
have limited success.
Jehoash limited his own potential.
Number two:
We can limit our potential
by focusing on our inadequacies
or our insecurities.
The account that drives that home
for me is that of Moses.
If you look in Exodus chapter 3,
and in this account we know
it’s not due to lack of zeal,
but, rather,
Moses’ own insecurities
that nearly caused him to limit
how he was used by Jehovah.
So we know in Exodus chapter 3,
he received a very weighty assignment
—going to Pharaoh.
And notice what happens
in verse 11,
Exodus 3:11.
It says: “However,
Moses said to the true God:
“‘Who am I that I
should go to Pharaoh
and bring the Israelites
out of Egypt?’”
Now, that’s a normal reaction.
We probably would have felt
the same way.
‘Jehovah, are you sure
you have the right person here?’
And Jehovah says, ‘No.
I do.
I will be with you.’
You look on in verse 13, it says:
“But Moses said to the true God:
‘Suppose I
“‘go to [Israel] and say to them,
“‘“The God of your forefathers
has sent me to you,”
“‘and they say to me,
“What is his name?”
What should I say to them?’”
Jehovah says, ‘No problem,’
and He explains His name
—even tells him
what His name means
and how that power
will be behind him.
Chapter 4, verse 1:
“However, Moses answered:
‘But suppose they do not believe me
“‘and do not listen to my voice,
for they will say,
“Jehovah did not appear to you.”’”
‘No problem, Moses.
What’s in your hand?’
It’s where he has the staff.
He shows him miracles
that he can perform to show
that Jehovah is behind him.
Look at verse 10:
“Moses now said to Jehovah:
‘Pardon me, Jehovah,
“‘but I have never been a fluent speaker,
neither in the past
“‘nor since you have spoken
to your servant,
for I am slow of speech
and slow of tongue.’”
‘OK, Moses,
who created the mouth?
I’ll speak for you.
Don’t worry about it.’
Look at verse 13:
“But he said: ‘Pardon me,
Jehovah, please send
anyone whom you
want to send.’”
And notice what it says
in verse 14:
“Then Jehovah’s anger
blazed against Moses.”
‘Fine, you know, I’m going
to just send somebody else.’
But, you see, thankfully,
Moses got the point
and he jumped into the assignment
and was used further by Jehovah.
But what happened here?
You notice, Moses got caught up
worrying about his inadequacies,
worrying about all the things
that could go wrong.
Jehovah was saying,
‘Just get moving,
and I will take care
of the rest.’
Jehovah saw that
Moses had the potential
to carry out this assignment;
however,
Moses was limiting himself.
Number three:
We can limit our own potential
by becoming paralyzed by fear
—fear of failure.
If you turn to the account
in Numbers chapter 13,
we notice that this
is what happened to the ten spies.
And it’s very interesting,
a phrase they used when they
came back from spying out the land.
Numbers chapter 13,
and look at verse 33.
It says:
“And there we saw the Nephilim,
“the sons of Anak,
who [were] from the Nephilim,
and in comparison
we seemed like grasshoppers,”
and notice, “both to us
and to them.”
You see, they ran into these
sons of Anak who were giants,
men of extraordinary size
who inhabited
the mountainous region of Canaan,
and it was understandable
that these enemies of Jehovah
viewed the Israelites
as puny grasshoppers.
‘You can just squash them
—no competition.’
But, you know, the ten spies
saw themselves the same way.
And, see, their view
of themselves in this situation
paralyzed them with fear
and caused them
to demoralize the entire nation.
But now, in contrast,
we think of the account of David,
who as a young man
also encountered a giant, Goliath.
And remember, Goliath also saw David
as a defenseless little boy
and as a grasshopper,
if you will.
But did David see himself
the same way?
No, he said: ‘You are coming to me
with sword and spear.
I am coming to you
with the name of Jehovah.’
You see, David did not allow himself
to be paralyzed by fear.
He trusted in Jehovah,
and David lived up to the potential
that Jehovah saw in him.
So, what’s the lesson for us?
Well, the lesson is that this illustrates
—these accounts illustrate—
that sometimes we can be
our own worst enemy at times.
See, lack of zeal
—not throwing ourself into the work,
as in the case of Jehoash;
or our own insecurities,
as in the case of Moses;
or fear of failure,
as in the case of the ten spies
—can cause us to limit
the potential that Jehovah sees in us.
So, what do we do?
Well, Jehovah’s words to Gideon
remind us of what we could do,
and we invite you
to turn to Judges chapter 6.
And you remember
that for seven years
the Midianites
oppressed the nation of Israel,
and Jehovah’s angel appears
to Gideon and says that He is going
to deliver Israel
out of this wicked nation.
How could he possibly succeed?
We read the account,
and Gideon saw himself
as the least significant
one of his father’s house.
And he said his father’s house
was the least significant family
of the tribe of Manasseh.
But yet Jehovah saw
the potential that Gideon had.
And what did Jehovah
tell him to do?
Look at Judges 6:14.
It says:
“Jehovah faced him and said:
“‘Go with the strength you have,
“‘and you will save Israel
out of Midian’s hand.
Is it not I who [sent] you?’”
Interesting.
‘Go with the strength
you have.
‘I know you cannot do it
on your own strength.
‘Just get moving;
throw everything you can into it;
and I, Jehovah,
will make up the difference.’
You see,
that’s what Jehovah is saying,
and that’s exactly what happened.
So may we be determined
to do the same.
We know that none of us
accomplish Jehovah’s work
on our own strength,
on our own wisdom,
on our own abilities.
But when we receive an assignment,
we need to just start moving.
Do not let our inadequacies
paralyze us.
Do not let fear of failure
Throw ourselves into the work.
Have a zeal for the work.
Go with the strength
that you have.
Trust in Jehovah
to make up the difference,
and you will live up to the potential
that Jehovah sees in you.